
Rioter

Hari washed his hands carefully at the tiny washbasin in th
courtyard. He wanted to get rid of the day’s grime before he
ate lunch. He looked around and noticed that everyone el i
was already sitting cross-legged on the floor, bent el i p
dal and rice, running their fingers through the liquefied es
» scoop out small mounds of food, which they hurriedly put
into their mouths. Filthy fingers, which no amount of so
could clean, thought Hari as he scrubbed his hands
the brownish trickle of water. He was not particular i;
hygiene—he lived in a basti where the communal taps —
ran dry and an out-of-season cloudburst provided him the ed
opportunity for a bath that could wash away the con. led
sweat of a prolonged summer. But he was glad that the blo d
pe Ni nity into a crusty membrane, like a second ekin
on his palms, disinte,
Ber Pirie ba moment he scrubbed it with
This lunch was his first substantial meal after months of

’ B . Ee
cavenging for food in the city’s garbage bins, overflowing
54 | STILLBORN SEASON

with the greasy refuse of the well-fed. He - CD oe
always hungry—but the sight of the thali hc its gent : u ‘
of rice soaked in dal, and its piles of deep-fried ree : °

the side, stoked his appetite with an urgency het - e ”
rush through his ablutions. There was no hiryahi as . “ :
could see, no mutton curry, no fried parts of either bir i
animal. Of what use are sleepy rioters, he thought. The mea

; it
as meant to nourish them for the work that lay ahead;
Ww

. tw wv. He
was not meant to swell their tummies with rich gravy.

would have to wash up quickly—what if the food en yor

He had killed for this meal, and he was prepared to die, but
1 stomach.

i Aichi had just been lifted, and this vps a good dif

to kill all the Sikhs who had dared to open their shops, their

karkhanas, their hotels and dhabas. He wondered how we

areas they were expected to covet after lunch, as he rolle

a. q
up his sleeves mn anticipation of the me: | and § uatted on

the floor with the other men. He was served lunch, finally,

by party-workers who shovelled rice out of a brass pot and

dropped it into his thali. He ate the food with a rl 9 |
had reserved for later, when he would pay for a mea y |
dragging a Sikh, or the son of a Sikh out of his house a

set his hair on fire. Or burn the tyres of a bus as a warning
to those who ventured out on the street. But for now, he was

justa labourer, a contract-worker who had toiled through the

day to earn this meal.

The soft mouthfuls of rice and dal reminded Gs of the
meals his mother had once cooked. He remembered sitting on

Radhika Oberoi | 55

the floor of their mud hut with his brothers, sifting the rice
on his thali with fingers caked with the filth of an afternoon
spent burrowing through wheat fields, demolishing anthills,
building mountains and valleys with the dark soil of his
village. His hands were cleaner then, even though they were
unwashed, he thought, as he licked a morsel off his fingers.
He wondered if his mother would be horrified at the sight of
him, sitting on the floor of a stranger’s home, eating with a
group of people he barely knew, but with whom he shared a
common guilt.

Hari noticed that they were seated in neat rows similar
to the ones that are formed at a langar. The prosperous and
the poor, the fortunate and the wretched, the virtuous and
the wicked—everyone sat and ate together at a langar. He
had eaten at many, especially on days when he had spent his
daily wage on a pack of beedis and a bottle of tharra. He
recalled now, as he slurped the watery dal on his thali, the
gurdwara’s rich fare—a thick dal that was a mix of black
gram and chickpeas cooked in pure desi ghee, spiced with
cinnamon and cloves.

A sudden shame came over him and he felt his appetite
vanish. Those langars had nourished him on days when the
tharra burned his empty stomach. The meals, lovingly cooked
by devoted Sikhs who recited favourite passages from the Guru
Granth Sahib, or sang in praise of their Guru as they cooked
their aromatic curries, would lull him into a pleasant slumber
after a day spent carrying bricks or shovelling gravel. He had
cut the very arms that had stirred simmering cauldrons of

56 | STILLBORN SEASON

ravy and had fed him. He had slit the very throats that had
i the Japji Sahib or the Kirtan Sohila and had eased

the fretful throb in his head, as he sat eating in a crowd of

hungry believers.
Ar the guilt with another mouthful and forced

himself to focus on one of the party-workers who had stood

up to address the group of men. They were to finish lunch as

quickly as possible and move towards the centre of the city.
They were to bring buses to a halt, and look for Sikh men

1 u der the eats. If he onductor or a 4 he
ch ng n S t Ci n of t

crou ;
passengers tried to protect Sikh co-travellers,

burn the bus down.
When they reached Connaught Place, they were to break

into all the garment, leather, and hardware stores - by
Sikhs. They were to deface that sinshuei pearl vhost ad in
the heart of Connaught Place— Capital Residency, ; Be
new hotel that was owned and run by an enterprising Sikh.

They were t
i i as a
the day for their work. Hari wanted to know if there w

rate the party-workers had arrived

at least,

Hari’s fingers worked furiously at mixing the dal and rice in

his thali.

He chewed slowly as he evaluated the murders he had

committed before lunch. He, and a few co-rioters had killed a

young bridegroom, whose long hair, oiled by the loving fingers |
of a crowd of aunts, had caught fire casily. The bridegroom

i h of
was sitting bare-chested and cross-legged in the verandah o |

o erase him. They would be paid at the end of

at—a few hundred rupees,

for every murder. But the amount was left unsaid;

Radhika Oberoi | 57

his home, the soles of his feet dyed with henna, his hair coiled
into a tight bun, waiting to be bathed in milk and turmeric
before the wedding ceremony, when Hari had broken in with
the rest of his gang. He had paused only for a few seconds
to take in the loveliness of the tiny flat — the courtyard fence
festooned with a few auspicious yellow and orange marigold
strings — markers of subdued festivity in a city alight with
funeral pyres. A turbaned uncle beat a dholak, loudly enough
for a group of women to dance to its wayward rhythm, but not
with the usual boisterous persistence that would have stirred
and entire neighbourhood into joining in. The lifting of the
curfew had obviously calmed this family; it had chosen not
to postpone the wedding of a beloved son. Here they were,
chachas and chachis, mausas and mausis, their hands on their
thick waistlines, their bodies shaking to Punjabi songs that
ended with a happy ‘Hai Shava!’ Here they were—demented
relatives and a few neighbours—deaf to the cries of the dying,
to the wails of the bereaved, as though the rioting of the last
few days was already a distant memory. He would destroy
the fragile beauty of the flat with oil and burning tyres, until
even the embers had died.

He had wrestled the bridegroom to the ground. His gang
members had pinned the boy’s thrashing arms and legs to the
verandah’s uneven concrete. They had torched his hair with a
matchstick. They had poured kerosene over his body, already
slick with oil and a paste of chandan. Hari remembered how
a heaving mass of bodies, draped in silk and clammy with
the exertion of too much dancing had tried to wrench the

58 | STILLBORN SEASON

rioters away from the bridegroom. But the young boy had
burned readily, like an incense stick exuding chandan before
shrivelling up.

Hari had also plunged a dagger into the bridegroom’s chest
before a wailing aunt could throw herself on the writhing body.
The body was stilled but the wailing only grew louder as Hari
and the other rioters left the house to find someone else to
slaughter. The neighbourhood was predominantly Sikh and
it was easy for him to find men he could butcher—they had
been instructed to spare the women—but he had managed
to murder only one other person. A septuagenarian who lay
on a charpoy in the sunlit balcony of his home, who couldn’t
get up and run when Hari jumped across a wall and hoisted
himself onto the balcony. The old man dropped his cup of
tea—it stained his kurta before the blood did when Hari slit
his throat with a dagger. He managed to gasp a final “Wahe
Guru’ before dying.

The crashing of the teacup brought an elderly woman to
the balcony. When she saw her husband with his throat slit,
she howled in a brief spasm of grief, her body swaying from
side to side, before running down a narrow flight of stairs
with a teenage boy.

‘A grandson,” Hari muttered, walking through the house,

searching for other Sikh relatives lurking in cupboards and

wooden cabinets. But he didn’t chase the two of them—he

knew they would not get very far; someone else from the gang

would grab the boy and burn him alive on the street.

Two easy murders, Hari thought, as he continued to eat.

Radhika Oberoi | 59

He would be paid a few hundred rupees only,
kill more Sikhs after lunch.

The food was making him drowsy,

unless he could

and he longed for a nap,
Maybe—the scavenger in him thought—the would not have

to kill anyone now. There would be enough bodies strewn
on the streets anyway; he could simply search the mass of
putrid flesh for broken arms or legs or even whole heads that
had been hacked. He could put the severed body parts in
a sack and show them to the party-workers,
least three or four thousand rupees for the thoroughness of

the murders. Were body parts enough proof that whole Sikh

men had been butchered? The party workers had not bothered
to tell them.

demanding at

He didn’t really want to kill any more.

Hari wondered if they would be offered a cup of tea in the
evening, after they had ripped open Connaught Place and
picked at its entrails. He looked forward to his next break
But, before that, there was work to be done. And money ,

ni earned—enough money to buy tharra every day and have
it with deep-fried pakodas.

II

The crystal chandelier hanging from the ceiling of the Capital
Residency, with its antique curwork filigree, refracted the light
in the dining hall in ways that made Ramanijit Singh say out

loud, often to himself, “What a sight, a rainbow inside!’ He

would watch with delight as beams of light bounced off the

60 | STILLBORN SEASON

polished silverware, or caught the glimmer of a diamond nose-
pin that clung to the delicately flared nostril of a guest, or
heightened the luminosity of a dark pair of eyes, or the flush
of cheeks bulging with a mouthful of tandoori chicken.

Capital Residency was Ramanjit Singh’s dream that
had taken the shape of a domed, chandeliered, and cobalt
velvet four-star hotel. He was determined to earn a fifth star
by importing an espresso machine from Italy that would
introduce this city to the joys of a frothy cappuccino, and
turn his coffee shop into a ‘multi-speciality restaurant’. He
was an optimist; he believed that a little imagination and a
‘lump-sum investment’, which included lining the pockets of
the capital’s bureaucrats with surplus change, could help him
accomplish everything he had set out to do.

The coffee shop had been almost empty for the last few
days; that, he knew, was becauseiof the bloody riot. He had
instructed the staff to keep the gates of the hotel locked, even
during the day, so that the goondas who were running loose
in the city would think the hotel was closed for business.
But he had not shut it down; how could he when there were
still a few guests who had checked in just before the riot?
Thick velvet curtains had been drawn over the windows, and
the crystal chandelier had not been lit for a few days. But
the guests were fed, and taken care of, with silent efficiency
and utmost courtesy, even though most of the staff had not
reported to work.

And now, with the bloody curfew relaxing, Dilli’s kebab-
and-chaap lovers would soon be back to his coffee shop...

Radhika Oberoi | 61

but...where was the staff? Had everyone been killed in this

bloody city?

As soon as the bloody looting and killing ended, he would

import a chef from Italy along with the espresso machine, to
make the dining experience a really ‘intercontinental one’
Apart from the usual chicken and mutton dishes— Butter
Chicken, Kadhaj Chicken, Mutton Dopyaza, Rogan Josh—
he was nothing on the menu to indicate the chefs multi-
cuisine proficiencies. While the restaurant catered to local
Boma taste, Ramanjit Singh was keen to include a few dishes
like ‘macaroni-cheese from Italy’ to attract foreign tourists
the ‘hippie-shippies with burnt skin and bleached hair’ who
roamed the corridors of Connaught Place’s Inner Circle with
gigantic rucksacks slung across their shoulders, studying travel
guides as they walked, bumping into sellers of chana-chor-
garam and occasionally, the cylindrical pillars that stood like
sentinels on the roundabout passages.

He would hire a bloody foreign chef, he decided, as he
walked towards the kitchen to find out why Table Tovo—the
only table that was occupied in the coffee shop-—hadn’t
been served. He would hire new staff—liveried waiters
housekeeping that actually changed the sheets after a guest
vacated a room, and a smartly dressed lady at the reception
who was not an aunt or an unmarried second cousin. He

NB .
ould redecorate and repair even though everything was still
new, if that was what it took to

his hotel.

Preoccupied with thoughts of an imminent sacking, he
3

get the foreigners to stay in

62 | STILLBORN SEASON

pushed open the door to the kitchen and pide oe
chopping a tomato in a silent rage. His underlings, w ’ :

been hired to cut vegetables and clean fowl and fish while he
recipes and stirred pots, were nowhere a be
working in a kitchen with naked birds
g to be marinated. A

invented grand

seen. He was alone,

aitin;

spread-eagled on the counter, wi

pumpkin had fallen to the floor and lay smashed in a puddle
of pulp and juice, its seeds scattered in every direction.

‘Arre Ravidas, why this bloody mess?” Ramanjit Singh asked,

waving his hands.
‘Arre sahib, what can a poor man like me do, all alone,

ing, i ied
cooking, cleaning, and even serving, Ravidas replied,

i ith renewed intensity.
chopping the tomato wit
“Where is everyone? Are they asleep? Or dead?’ thundered
Ramanjit Singh. He picked up an onion that had rolled to the
oor, and continued, ‘Guests are waiting for their food, but

this kitchen has closed down without my permission.
“When they walk in and slit our throats, they will not take
your permission, ‘
wore its tender flesh with a kitchen knife—a melodramatic
gesture that irritated his employer. oo
“Who will walk in? Nobody can walk in without my

cy
permission. What bloody nonsense you talk, =

i i out
Ramanjit Singh raised his voice, but was careful not to shou
at the chef.

‘Sahib, curfew or no curfew, anything can happen at

anytime..

sahib,’ said Ravidas. He lifted a chicken and |

‘most of the staff is still at home...only I am

here, sahib, only I am here...’ said Ravidas, his steady voice

Radhika Oberoi | 63

threatening to break, as he finished chopping the tomato.

Ramanjit Singh grew silent. He had seen the news on TV.
A beauteous newsreader insisted that the situation was under
control, although he knew that Dilli was still tense. But his
guests—a businessman from Meerut and an elderly couple who
was scheduled to drive to Agra as soon as it was safe—were
waiting for a meal. They would have to be served, and he
would do it himself, if everyone else was at home, hiding
under their mattresses like bloody chicken.

‘Staff or no staff, we will continue to work, okay? You
prepare the dishes, and / will carry them to the coffee shop,’
Ramanjit Singh said, as he fumbled in the kitchen cabinet for
a bottle opener. He found it in a dark corner, amidst a mess
of broken china and soiled napkins, and used it to open a
bottle of Campa Cola. The bottle fizzed as the crown yielded
to the pressure of the opener. He poured the bubbly liquid
into a glass and placed it on a tray. He balanced the tray on
the palm of his hand and left the kitchen, turning around
one last time to say to his chef, ‘As long as I am alive, I will
serve, okay?’

He walked down the long corridor from the kitchen to the
coffee shop, holding the tray of Campa Cola slightly above
his shoulder. The stained-glass mirrors that lined the walls
multiplied his reflection, and he was pleased at the sight of
several Ramanjit Singhs walking alongside him.

When a reflection disintegrated and shards of glass fell on
the corridor, he realized that someone had thrown a stone

at a mirror. When the walls reflected strange faces—their

64 | STILLBORN SEASON

eyes glinting like splintered glass, their mouths ore oe
white cloth—he knew with a sudden dread that ine oody
goondas had broken into his hotel. He felt a pair of i.
hands grab him, as the tray tumbled to the floor, oe =
in Campa Cola. He tried to wrestle with the hands, but fe
himself pushed towards the floor by muscular arms.

He smelt the kerosene before his skin began to ls

His burning body, with its flailing arms and wild locks,
thrashed about on the polished marble Bam before '
of the men stilled it by pouring more fuel fa Bis torso an
stoking the live bundle of bones, flesh, and hair.

III

After they murdered Ramanjit Singh, the rioters walked into
the coffee shop to find only a few guests, trembling as they
huddled together, awaiting their death. The businessman from

Meerut had opened a window and was trying to jump out of

as one of im with a can of fue N He
it the rioters appr oact ed hi 1 1 1
1

i it—butchered on the dining
was caught and his throat was slit—bu

table, despite his short hair and clean-shaven face.

The elderly couple was spared—the wife had been chanting
the Gayatri Mantra and had fallen to her knees when one of

the rioters placed a bloodied knife on her husband’s heaving

chest. a
“We are not from here, Hai Ram, Hai Krishna, Hai Bhole

Nath let us go,” she wailed. cal
. <
‘Hai Ram,” she cried out again. ‘Have mercy on us!

Radhika Oberoi | 65

nearly fainted at the feet of one of the ruffians. But the knife
was slowly removed, before jt could puncture her husband’s
soft flesh, and she was made to-stand next to him. Trembling,
she joined her hands in gratitude as the rioters withdrew,

The rioters walked into every room of the small hotel,

setting the upholstery on fire, breaking porcelain tea cups and

bone china dinner plates, plunging their daggers and knives
into thick mattresses to check for guests lying between the
covers. They found no one in the rooms.

Before the rioters left the premises, they helped themselves
to mattresses and blankets, to fluffy towels and bed linen, to
stainless steel bathroom fittings that could be sol
price, to bars of Lux soap and unused tubes of toothpaste
that could also be sold. They unplugged the gigantic black
telephone that stood at the reception desk and carried it with
them. And as a parting gesture of annihilation, they unhinged
the crystal chandelier from its hook on the vaulted ceiling of
the coffee shop. It swayed as its tear-drop baubles refracted the
yellow light of the room into broken rainbows, before it came
crashing down. It lay on a heap in the middle of the coffee
shop, a cut-glass leviathan, splendid even in ruin.

d for a good

Iv

Hari did not participate in the burning of Ramanjit Singh.
And he was not with his gang when they plundered Capital
Residency. He was in the kitchen. A whiff of grilled meat
had distracted him as he had walked up the stairs of the

66 | STILLBORN SEASON

hotel, and he had broken away from the rioters to follow

the aroma.
The kitchen, with its piles of chopped vegetables and pots :
roused the scavenger in Hari. He burrowe

i ing kormas :
pb alding his arms

i i f a tandoor, sc
deep into the burning embers 0 :
as he pulled out a chicken roasting inside, seasoned curd,

inger. He dipped a freshly baked naan

black pepper, and ginger :
into a pot of tender lamb curry. He lapped up a oe ull o
creamy kheer, licking the sides to get every morsel of it.

He opened the kitchen cabinet, searching for other treats
to feast on or to hoard—and pulled out the chef. oo

Startled, Hari reached for his dagger to stab the quipesng
man. But the scent of the food distracted him and he pause

to ask the chef, ‘Are you the khansama?

Ravidas nodded vigorously.

‘Did you make all this?’ Hari continued, gripping the chef

by the neck.
a haan! I made everything today, Ravidas managed to

sputter. Tears rolled down his greasy face. He cursed himself

silently for coming to work today, and not staying at hog
like so many of the staff. Over the years, his dedication to

cooking the finest curries in Delhi ha

grief—a strained marriage that had finally snapped because he

in his thick hair. But he had not anticipated losing his life for

the sake of cooking a few dishes for waiting guests.

d caused him much

worked long and erratic hours at Capital Residency; diabetes,

; ey streaks
for he tasted every dessert he prepared; premature grey

Radhika Oberoi | 67

He knew that Ramanjit Singh had been killed, and that a
similar fate awaited him. He had heard a commotion outside
the kitchen, and had promptly hidden inside the odds-and-
ends cabinet. The muffled sounds of wailing and Ramanjit
Singh’s final “Wahe Guru’ reached him through the closed
door of the cabinet, and he sobbed softly in the darkness,
knowing that he would never see his quick-tempered but
large-hearted boss again.

‘Don’t kill me, I'm a Hindu,’ he whimpered as Hari held
him by the collar and pressed the dagger against his neck.

‘Please,’ he cried, ‘my children will be orphaned. What have
they done to deserve this?’

Hari considered the question. What had anybody done to
deserve this? And what had he done to deserve his life—as a
scavenger, as a contract worker with irregular wages, and now,
as a hired killer who was not even sure why he was supposed
to go after all the Sikhs in the city? He had seen grainy images
of a body covered with marigold garlands, lying inside an open
coffin, on the television set in the tharra shop. Was that the
Prime Minister? Did her death have something to do with
the sardars he sometimes drank with and lay on the footpath
with, in a tharra stupor?

The news of the past few days was a muddle in his head.
The only thing he knew for certain was his insatiable hunger.
If only he could eat without having to kill, if only he could go
back to the construction site he had been removed from—he
would lift bricks in the scorching sun for the rest of his life,
and not waste his money on tharra.

68 | STILLBORN SEASON

‘Can you make gajar ka halwa?’ he asked Ravidas, slackening
i s neck.

his grip around the chef’s nec
bit managed to smile. ‘I can make the best gajar -

halwa in Delhi; he said, relief coursing slowly through his

eins.

“Then make it, now; said Hari, as he let go of the chef.

With unsteady hands, Ravidas grated a few carrots for the

halwa, silently thanking all the benevolent deities he had never

prayed to until now, for his culinary skills and his ability to

work under pressure.

Vv

After ransacking Capital Residency, the rioters reached Punjabi

Bagh. It was early evening, and they headed towards a few

Jarge shops that had lifted their shutters and opened their

stones
doors as soon as the curfew was eased. They would pelt

at display windows. They would climb over walls and throw

a mashaal into the pruned rose bushes of the wealthy Si
merchants who lived and worked there. They would loot their

be ieee
homes, their offices, their glittering showroom

Hari, who walked through the street like a os
his senses dulled by the food he had consumed, wondere

j i mises
if anyone would notice if he just stood outside the pre

they were moving towards and shouted ‘Sardar ka bachcha,

murdabad, with some of the other men in the group. Slogan-

ioters’ i ture
shouting was a critical part of the rioters’ campaign to rup go

j Aig »
the tenuous calm of the city. Hari knew that killing sar

Radhika Oberoi | 69

men was more lucrative than proclaiming on the streets that
they deserved to die, and he decided to collect body parts the
moment a Sikh was murdered, as he had planned earlier. He
would then ask for his payment from the party-worker, and
leave the city in a few days. He would find a permanent job
in a small furniture factory on the outskirts. He would work
with tools—hammers, screwdrivers, saws—and forget that he
had ever held a lathi or a dagger in his hands.

The rioters surrounded Balbir & Sons, a garment store, Harj
was fascinated by the family of mannequins that stood at the
display window. They were wearing colourful winter clothes.
Their dilated eyes and pink faces made Hari wish he could
touch them—especially the child mannequin, whose shiny,
plastic cheeks he wanted to pinch with his rough hands.

Someone shattered the glass of the display window. The
family of mannequins was torched. Hari watched the painted
eyes of the dolls melt, their smudged and leaky irises a silent
plea to stop the mayhem.

‘Gudda aur guddi aur unka bachcha, teeno seedha parlok!’
he mumbled to himself, as he watched the flames consume
the faces that smiled through the inferno.

A group of men broke into the showroom. They walked
in through the shattered window and made a bonfire of the
scarves, sweaters, and Pashmina shawls on the shelves of the
store. Hari remained outside, with a band of sloganeers. He

would go into the showroom when the proprietor was killed,
to pick up the limbs.

70 | STILLBORN SEASON

‘Sardar ka bachcha, murdabad, they shouted into the

winter evening.

‘Sardar ka bachcha murdabad,” Hari repeated feebly, longing

to get back to his basti. )
‘Khoon ka badla, khoon,’ the group shouted.

‘Khoon ka badla...” Hari managed to say, when a shot rang

oganeers st ndin: oul e dispe B t I collaps n

sl g sta g tsid d sp! rsed. u Ha 1 ed 8)

the pavement Ss the bu et ren 18 est. A few pa OWS
h p 5 as 11 t t h ch § IT

hirruped into the twilight, before the sloganeers resumed
Fe

their chanting.

“Khoon ka badla, khoon,” they hollered, stumbling over

Hari’s body as they made their way down the street.

Vagabonds

A wooden platform, tiny wheels attached to its four sides,
slithered between the rows of cars, buses and the occasional
bullock cart as the lights turned red at the Bhikaji Cama
intersection. Bhola, perched on top of the platform, navigated
it expertly by pressing his bandaged hands against the road
and pushing it forward. The wheels scratched the pockmarked
surface of the road, and Bhola inched ahead, humming

fragments of a song he had recently heard on the Murphy
~ radio that stood on a shelf in Kallu’s Chicken and Mutton
~ Shop: ‘Hum bande hain pyar ke, mange sabki khair.

Bhola’s legs were useless stumps that protruded out of his

~ mobile platform. Whether they had been amputated in a
hospital or smashed to pulp on some footpath was a mystery.

But the myth of limbs that once functioned—tight calves,

football thighs, hairy toes—was reinvented and refurbished
with startling details by the younger urchins who shared the
footpath with him. ‘He could even chase the Rajdhani Express,

72 | STILLBORN SEASON

but one day, he threw himself on the track and the train
crushed his legs.. just like, just like...sugarcane is crushed,
for ras, said thirteen-year-old Bittoo, who sold balloons and

‘googlis—eyewear with cellophane paper of magenta, parrot

green and cobalt blue pasted on the plastic lenses—at the

intersection. Satisfied with the impact the sugarcane simile

had on his audience, Bittoo proceeded to explain why Bhola

had decided to lie on the railway track one morning. ‘Rekha,

he said, ‘Rekha ditched Bhola... She ran off with an old seth.
He was rich. Bhola was poor. And Rekha was a kutti who
panted over money...

Bhola knew that the footpath-dwellers gossiped about him
in loud whispers. Despite his obvious handicap, he was the
only one who made a decent living begging at the intersection.
The coins that jangled in his tin bowl were enough to buy

some mutton from Kallu's Chicken and Mutton Shop now and 1
then. At other times he bought the cheaper offal, which he
would cook in an old saucepan, the only utensil he possessed,

in a corner of the pavement. He always shared his weekly

mutton or gurday-

kapooray curry with everyone else who

lay sprawled on the footpath, or polished the leather shoes

of the wealthy, or sold balloons, hand mirrors, plastic combs
there was

and eyewear at the crossing. On days like these,

always enough cash to pay off the constable o
wouldn't interrupt the feasting ragamuffins by tapping the

footpath with his lathi or by overturning the saucepan with

its simmering gravy or by holding a beggar’s offspring up in

the air and threatening to throw the wailing child on the road

n duty, so he

Radhika Oberoi | 73

to spli
A the skull, and to supply more meat for a spicy
There was a raggedy sweetness about Bhola that mad
strangers who looked out of the windows of their Fiat. :
Fi cer a coin or two in his bowl. The ight tl
of his head, the timbre of his voice—deep and yearnin
oe > “ and lilting, free of the pain that if eT
ne y pers the attention of the giver of alms to
ace, to his lips parted in a half-smile that contained all
the melancholia of Bhikaji Cama on any day of the week .
songs ke mumbled as he raised his tin bowl to the love
; - “ don The grotesque stumps that dangled uselessly
oo I - on oe poe or they merely enhanced the
ittle spar
tea and a piece of mathri to dip [. a B
repelled by him, like they were by the over-zealous _— i, io
was not a beggar but a seller of plastic knick-knacks and .
not as prosperous as Bhola.
Begging was a subtle art, Bhola knew, and he was a natural
at it. fe wobbly platform, his outstretched arms and careful
selection of songs, all of these lent his destitution the allu . of
an actor in the latest blockbuster, whose fate had faltered . .
> and squalor, but who would soon emerge from the blows
Sy en and pi happily ever after in a palatial
over. He encou i i
on the footpath to invent stories A
bandaged hands; the myths enhanced his stature asa piv

~ but nobl
e creature. He stoked their imagination by offering

74 | STILLBORN SEASON

incomplete sentences that lingered in the air, and inden
into deep sighs. T was sleeping on a charpoy, - er pe i
when my father came into the courtyard and hit - o ies
with his stick...” he would say. Or, Palis.. The - -
“Polio!” My mother beat her chest...” Or, ‘1 a c oe > '
onion in a dhaba, to pay for my tea aod RA .t » ee
Kishore Kumar song on the radio...I didn’t tes - :
chopped my fingers till the onion acim - - Lee
that traffic was dense today; this made him sing a lit —
The curfew had just been lifted; Si had grou i oe
city and Bhikaji Cama was pa ee ue a
i ion looked busy, just the way he be
A were good for a day of lucrative begging. Fo
the curfew, when not even a cyclist had vehonl on or
nearly starved. He had been reduced to em ” ow
in the city’s garbage bins, like his rag-picker frien ; oe
been mortifying for a beggar of his we oo! © : ~
se for a few crumbs. The mur
pried A been bad for business; al he seally vend .
for this city to forget about it, to pt inp its fn an i ; -
on the accelerator, to slow down at Bhikaji Cama inters

and roll down a window whenever he tapped on it with his

tin bowl.

II

she was already convinced t

’ : lly crowded. =f
It was still early and the intersection was unusually c BW wanted her to be happy. He

Normally, the latter part of the day was rush hour, when buses

Radhika Oberoi | 75

crammed with commuters, cavalcades of white Ambassadors

with red lights flashing on their roofs, matchbox-shaped
Premier Padminis, and that new car, the Maruti 800), ignored
the traffic signals and lurched ahead, to the only destination
they had in common: home, In the mornings, traffic was
sluggish, as though reluctant to make its way to work or
school or Parliament. But today was different. Bhola sensed
an impatience in the 7-a.m throng on the road. Roads sedated

into an uneasy calm by the day and night curfew, which lasted

for two weeks after the Prime Minister was shot, now buzzed
with the haste of those passing through,

The public js happy to get out and move, thought Bhola, as
he tapped on the window of 2 caramel-brown
‘Hum bande hain pyar ke,

as the window of the passe

Premier Padmini.
mange sabki khair,” he sang softly,
niger seat was rolled down. A gust
of eau-de-cologne blew out of the car and enveloped Bhola
in a tangerine-jasmine mist, which, for a few seconds,

him into a world he did not belong to. A world of la
cloths and long-

invited

ce table
stemmed roses in crystal vases, A world of
hot baths, alarm clocks, and VCR dinners,

A woman with a short mop of dark curls peeped out of the
window. Bhola appraised her with lowered but shifty eyes as
she rummaged through her handbag for loose change. Patches
of talcum powder were visible on her neck. Her slim gold
bangles tinkled as her hand dived into a pocket inside her bag.
‘Hum bande hain pyar ke...” he sang. But he could tell that

hat he was a person of love, who
saw her hand emerge from the

76 | STILLBORN SEASON

bag with a coin, a shiny twenty-five paisa. She adjusted the
pallu of her betel-leaf green silk sari, which had shifted slightly
from her bosom to reveal a hint of cleavage and a string of
off-white pearls around her neck. She pulled at it and covered
her chest completely before putting the coin in Bhola’s tin
bowl. She smiled as he saluted her with his bandaged hand,
but caught a whiff of him and crinkled her nose.

‘Best not to raise my arm, these memsahibs can smell my
armpits even from their cars, Bhola scolded himself, as the
4 lights turned green and he made his way to the pavement.
p He would spend a few minutes at the tea stall off the road,
under the shade of a devil tree. Maybe a kind babu, reading
the Navbharatr Times on a wooden bench outside the stall
would offer him a cup of tea.

The stall was full of customers, sipping tea from small,

conical glasses, in the November fog. Bhola positioned his

platform near a counter, where a saucepan simmered with a

milky-brown liquid. A lanky boy, who wore nothing but a thin
cotton vest perforated with holes, and a pair of half-pants that

shuddered and flapped in the skin-dimpling breeze, crushed

When the tea had formed an avalanche of bubbles in the pan,

the boy removed it from the stove and poured it messily into

tea to waiting customers, he glanced meaningfully at Sadho
Bhai, the owner of the stall, who sat behind a counter lined

and orange, hard-boiled sweets.

a few cardamom pods and sprinkled them into the liquid.
glasses placed in rows on the counter. Before he carried the

with glass jars full of mathri, namak pare, glucose biscuits,

Radhika Oberoi | 77

. Bhola observed the two—the portly employer and his
a employee—reaching a silent agreement. Sadho Bhai
e a imperceptibly, but Bhola, who watched them
: osely, noticed the folds of Sadho Bhai’s,chin move up and
. . :
om es Almost immediately, the boy handed Bhola a
g o o ea before walking past him to serve paying customers
J in the cold. Bhola bowed deeply, his hands folded
en oe warm glass, to express his gratitude. Sadho Bhai's
any chins moved up and down i
, yet again, to acknowled
the gesture. But when Bhola began to sing, ‘Hum bande bain
ree Je Bhai rotated the large knob of the radio
on the shelf with the jars of crumb
y snacks. It hissed and
ped before the voice of an announcer became audible
oe i song was drowned by All India Radio’s distorted
: He pushed his platform ahead and positioned
imself against the wooden le
g of a table, i
a group of tea drinkers. EEE
, omen faded as the voice of the announcer rolled into
the air like the fog, thick with n
A ews. After days of rioti
hi capital city had grown calmer, the voice said, as the oe .
« « ’ -
a - The police had brought the situation under
ontrol and law and order had b
eg hd me een restored. Schools and

Bhola watched them snigger—the office-goers, the ex-

servicemen i i
en in their canvas shoes, the slouchers whose tea

t
urned cold before they put the glass to their lips, the frantic

peddlers of rumour and scandal, who finished the spiced brew

in one long gulp and raised their hands for refill—when th
e

-

78 | STILLBORN SEASON

announcer droned on about law and order. One of them, an
elderly man who wore a maroon cardigan over a thin cotton
kurta-pyjama, folded the newspaper that lay on his lap and
flung it across the table.

‘Police, haan, he said to the group around the table. “The
entire police force is harami. It has let the sardars die on the
streets like dogs.’

‘Haan, haan...this radio-shadio news is cow dung.. .there is
no laaah and no aarder in Dili,’ said another, slightly younger
man, who dipped a glucose biscuit in his tea as he spoke.

‘And...oh ji... listen to the latest stupidity. ..schools and
colleges are opening. Now the riot-makers will pull out sardar
children from school buses and burn them alive on the main
road,” said a third middle-aged man who wore a monkey cap,
which covered his head and neck. Only his eyes, nose and lips

were visible through a gap in the woollen fabric.

‘But the schools can’t remain shut forever. I am so happy
my grandchildren have gone back to school...all they did was
listen to Binaca Geetmala on the radio.. at full volume.. Jam
deaf in one ear but even I knew that the radio was too loud...”

said the elder in the maroon cardigan.
1 am not mourning for her...Mmm, actually I think it’s

good for our country that the Prime Minister is dead. So
many people were killed inside the golden gurudwara, because
she woke up one day and decided that terrorists were hiding

there...’ ventured the glucose-biscuit eater.

‘Shhhh...don’t say such things in public, said the man who
wore the monkey cap. He lowered his voice and continued,

Radhika Oberoi | 79

.
Even

these mud walls have ears. You never know who j

is

listenin i
g- What if someone comes from behind and po
can of kerosene on you...’ or

Then let me die for speaking the truth. You think I
scared? So many of my Sikh friends have died in th o
Just the other day, a sardar taxi-driver I knev was killed 8 .
driving a pregnant woman to the hospital—when A

els cn
e was hiding inside cupboards and under mattr

esses duri
the curfew,” the biscuit or

ee eater bit into one with vehemence,
tinued. “She was already in labour: her h
:

had a two-wheeler; usband only

the neighbours refused to h
Ea elp. Only thi
poor taxi driver agreed to drive them. ..he was Cth: dr .
oe ve thrown around his neck. The tyre was set on fir )
od knows what h i he
i appened to that howling woman and. the
N Bhola wondered whether he should move a little closer to
Se The conversation was of little interest to him;
could go on talking till dusk and beyond. All he really cared

about was
: whether the group at the table would throw him a
coin, or a biscuit. But just then
cd

they

the lights at the intersecti
i ction
turned red. Bhola decided not to hover like a fly over the tea

drinkers, but to find a well-scrubbed family in a car, to charm

Rich Li . .
th his song into parting with spare change

III

: : Bajaj scooter grazed the white lines of the zebra crossin
ut stopped just in front of it when the lights turned a

so | STILLBORN SEASON

Bhola crouched at the entrance of the tea stall, waiting for the
traffic to stop, so he could twist and turn his platform - get
to the scooter. He used his instincts to single out the pair >
the two-wheeler—a Sikh father and son. They waited at the
crossing, their old scooter sputtering. Their turbans nosed
the lifting of the curfew. The son, a boy of Re or eig t i
school uniform, had his arms around his father’s ample girt
de pillion.

N re AP sardar, taking his son to school, look, look,
they are not scared. . .of...of the...men...with lathis.. a
police...” Bhola said to no one in particular before ah ing
towards the pavement. He would make his way to i pair ”
the scooter and bless their travels across this city with rh e
filmy songs he knew about good luck and divine ey
They would be so pleased with him that they would throw
him a five-rupee—no, a ten-rupee—notel N

The wheels on Bhola’s platform squealed, resisting the
gravel of the road, as he pushed ahead to reich the scooter
before the signal changed. He was about to Br at the i
crossing when he noticed that the lights had, i fact, rt
green, but the rows of cars and buses and mini-vans hadn't
moved. The usual sounds of engines rasping oi a stare, car
horns peep-peeping, and bicycle bells tring tringing their 4
out of the Bhikaji Cama intersection were missing, The roa
was silent and watchful, the gentle whirr of engines like an

i i Id sto
erratic heartbeat, which, upon sensing menace, wou p

at any moment.

-

Radhika Oberoi | 81

Bhola could see the scooter he had been pushing his
platform towards; a few men had formed a small circle around
it. They hovered around the‘scoorer, iron rods in hand, inching
closer. The sardar on the scooter looked straight ahead, his
knuckles white as his hands gripped the handlebars, his spine
erect, as though not acknowledging the danger would avert it.
His son clung to him, burying his face into his father’s back.
Bhola couldn't tell if the little boy was crying or not, but he
knew that the men, who had brought the traffic at Bhikaji
Cama crossing to a stupefied halt, were about to burn the
father-son pair alive, on the road. He could see one of them
unscrewing a tin can,

Was Bhola going to watch innocent sardars die on this
intersection, Ais intersection, as he crouched on his platform
like a useless cripple, a beggar who stank of the sewer? He
would have to do something, quickly, and prove that he really
was the kind of hero whose songs he sang to get commuters
to fling coins into his bowl. The group of rioters had thrown
the sardar on to the road. His son kept sitting on the scooter,
his body shaking. One of the men was about to pour the
kerosene when Bhola blew a whistle.

It was a pink, plastic whistle, the kind his balloon-salesman
friend Bittoo sold at the intersection. Its shrill ‘Pfree...
rrrrreece.. .pfreecee’ alarmed the crows and sparrows on the
neem tree into silence, but stirred up the vagabonds of Bhikaji
Cama. Our they came, swarming over the footpaths—the

maimed, the pock-marked, the pus-infected, the one-eyed,
the limbless. They hobbled across the street on crutches or
82 | STILLBORN SEASON

lunged ahead on wooden platforms like Bhola’s or crawled
on their limbs.

The army of vagabonds reached the spot where the sardar
lay, trembling and doused in kerosene. Swiftly, the derelicts
parted the crowd that had circled the sardar. They rode their
platforms through the limbs of the rioters, startling the men
into dropping their iron rods. Sly urchins clung to the feet of
the rioters; one of them started to wipe the shoes of the man
who held the can of kerosene. He rubbed his rag expertly on
the filthy shoes, singing the anthem of all shoeshine boys:
‘Mera joota hai Japani!’ The man dropped the canister in
shock, and pushed the shoeshine boy away.

‘Mera joota hai Japani, sang the other urchins, clinging to
the feet of the rioters, touching them with suppurating skin,
breathing their putrid breath on startled faces. The rioters
slowly moved away from the scootet.

‘Chee chee, haramzadal’ they shrieked, as the beggars
touched them here, poked them there. ‘Bhag, madarchod!’
they yelped, trying to free their legs from the grip of the
urchins.

Bhola hobbled through the mayhem created by his loyal
friends from the pavements in and around Bhikaji Cama
intersection, hollering the song about being a man of love.
Bittoo joined the group of revellers too; he made bubbles from
a soapy liquid in a small plastic container, and blew them at
the rioters. The commotion lasted long enough for the sardar,
who lay sprawled on the road, to get up, grab his son from

the scooter, and run across the road.

Src an

Radhika Oberoi | 83

When one of the rioters noticed the sardar and his son
flecing, he lurched forward, grabbing his iron rod as he tried
to run after the Sikh. But Bhola grabbed his ankles and sang
his song of love, and Bittoo blew a large bubble, which erupted
on the rioter’s face, covering it with foamy liquid. Enraged, he
picked up the can of kerosene that lay forgotten on the road
and threatened to pour it on Bhola. When Bhola continued “
croon, his delight increasing as the rioter fumed, he poured the
fuel on the scooters front tyre. The rioter then lit a match and
threw it on the tyre. The rubber exploded in flames, dispersing
the crowd of vagabonds and the rioters they clung to.

Bhola slurred, ‘Hum bande hain pyar ke, mange sabki
khair,” as he pushed his platform towards the pavement. The
burning tyre put an end to the singing and dancing at the
crossing. The rioters disappeared into a blanket of fog. Engines
wheezed, traffic started to move,

“We are people of love,” hummed Bhola, “We wish you
well...

Iv

Bhola reached the tea stall, where he was greeted with a cascade
of coins. Tea-drinkers, newspaper-readers and everyone else
who had gathered to watch the sardar burn now surrounded
him. He was the hero of Bhikaji Cama intersection. Someone
threw a red rose into his bowl. Sadho Bhai emerged from

behind the counter and offered him a glass full of tea, with
extra milk and sugar.

84 | STILLBORN SEASON

Sala haramis, thought Bhola. They just sat here, sipped
their tea, and watched as a sardar was nearly roasted, like
chicken inside a tandoor. His people, his stinking lepers and
urchins, had hearts made of pure gold biscuits—the type
smuggled across continents in briefcases, in Hindi films. His
filthy madarchods were better any day than this suited-booted
crowd, which could sit on its gaand and discuss the Prime
Minister’s death and the murder of the city’s Sikh men from
morning till evening, but could do nothing to save a man’s
life.

A school bus slowed down at the intersection. Girls in
maroon cardigans peeped out of open windows, staring at the
fallen scooter, and the rings of flames that slowly consumed
its metallic body. A few of the girls placed lace handkerchiefs
on their delicate, upturned noses as the bus picked up speed
and crossed the intersection.

Convent-school girls, they don’t know anything except
birthday parties and memsahib English, thought Bhola, as
he prepared to cross the road. He wondered if the little Sikh
boy had managed to make his way to school.

The lights at the intersection changed to red, and a new
row of vehicles came to a standstill. Bhola cleared his throat

and prepared to sing, for another round of begging.

—



